README.md, before:

 <!-- badges: start -->
  [![R-CMD-check](https://github.com/toebR/joincheckr/workflows/R-CMD-check/badge.svg)](https://github.com/toebR/joincheckr/actions)
  <!-- badges: end -->

# joincheckr
An R package with functions to get information on a left join between 2 data frames.
Feel free to create pull requests, open issues etc. Contributions are very welcome.


<img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/65813696/105766734-63bda380-5f5a-11eb-94bb-6f78f021e805.png" width="400" height="461" align = "right" />

## Introduction
I often find myself in the situation where I need to join (well, left-join) two data sets which are messy and/or too large for any visual control.
Some months ago, I started to write small (and honestly, very simple) helper functions to get information on a possible join before I actually join the data.
In this package, I share some of them which might prove useful to others. This is most of all a learning project for writting transferable functions and wrapping them in a documented package, so don't expect too much.

## Installation
The package is not yet on CRAN so you can install it from github and load it into your session by running the following line:

```r
remotes::install_github("toebR/joincheckr")
library(joincheckr)
```

## Functions
Regarding nomenclature, the functions arguments are distinguished between "data" and "ID". A request for "data_x" is a request for your first data frame i.e. the data frame the join will be based on. "data_y" is subsequently the other. Same principle goes for the "ID" where we enter the common join ID of df x or y. **All functions should be fully pipeable with tidyverse functions**.

Before we get to the functions, lets prepare 2 example datasets: data1 and data2.

```r
datagen <- function(){
  data1 <<- data.frame(ID = c(1,1, 2, 3, 4),
                       GroupX = c("A", "A", "A", "B", "C"),
                       VarX = c(1, 10,100, 1000, 10000))
  
  data2 <<- data.frame(ID = c(1, 2, 2, 3, 5),
                       GroupY = c("A", "B", "B", "C", "D"),
                       VarY = c(2, 20,200, 2000, 20000))
  
  
}
datagen()
```
Which assigns data1 and data2 to the global environment.
data1:
```r
> data1
  ID GroupX  VarX
1  1      A     1
2  1      A    10
3  2      A   100
4  3      B  1000
5  4      C 10000
```
data2:
```r
> data2
  ID GroupY  VarY
1  1      A     2
2  2      B    20
3  2      B   200
4  3      C  2000
5  5      D 20000
```

### get_join_cols()
This function returns a dataframe where columns of two entered dataframes are listed which would be subject to a join.

```r
get_join_cols(data_x = data1, data_y = data2)
```
```r
    cols origin
1     ID data_x
2 GroupX data_x
3   VarX data_x
4     ID data_y
5 GroupY data_y
6   VarY data_y
```
### get_join_count()
This function counts how many times an ID is present in a data frame and returns a tibble.
**Note: When passing a column as ID_x, make sure to use the $ operator**

```r
> get_join_count(data_x = data1, ID_x = data1$ID)
```
```r
  `data1$ID` join_count
       <dbl>      <int>
1          1          2
2          2          1
3          3          1
4          4          1
```

### get_join_rows_n()
This function returns a tibble showing how many rows of df x have at least one join partner in df y by providing the join ID columns of x and y.
0 indicates no join, 1 indicates join.
```r
get_join_rows_n(data_x = data1, ID_x = data1$ID, ID_y = data2$ID)
```
```r
  join_index     n
       <dbl> <int>
1          0     1
2          1     4
```
With our example data, we see that out of five rows in data1, 4 rows have a join partner in data2 based on the column "ID".

## get_join_rowindex()
This function creates a new column in the first df we enter into the function which indicates if the row will receive at least 1 join or not out of df 2. 0 indicates no join, 1 indicates join.
```r
get_join_rowindex(data_x = data1, ID_x = data1$ID, ID_y = data2$ID)
```
```r
  ID GroupX  VarX join_index
1  1      A     1          1
2  1      A    10          1
3  2      A   100          1
4  3      B  1000          1
5  4      C 10000          0
```
## Examples
### 1) Get all rows out of a dataframe which would have a join partner in another
```r
library(dplyr)

get_join_rowindex(data1, data1$ID, data2$ID) %>%
  filter(join_index == 1) #added filter function
```
Result:
```r
  ID GroupX VarX join_index
1  1      A    1          1
2  1      A   10          1
3  2      A  100          1
4  3      B 1000          1
```

### 2) Get nr of ID entries before and after a join
Sometimes, an ID is appearing multiple times in a dataframe. If both dataframes have multiple ID entries, a single ID in df 1 might multiply after the **left** join with df 2 since different rowdata on the same id in df 2 will be joined back to a single entry in df 1. To have a bit of control over this, we can use **get_join_count()** before and after a join to see if the entries multiplied.

First we run the function on our data1:
```r
get_join_count(data_x =  data1, ID_x = data1$ID)
```
```r
  `data1$ID` join_count
       <dbl>      <int>
1          1          2
2          2          1
3          3          1
4          4          1
```
This result shows us, that we have 2 entries for ID 1 in our data1.

Now we perform a dplyr::left_join() between data1 and data2 and then run the function again on the result
```r
left_join(data1, data2, by = "ID") %>%
  get_join_count(ID_x = ID)
```
Which yields the following result.
```r
     ID join_count
  <dbl>      <int>
1     1          2
2     2          2
3     3          1
4     4          1
```
As we see, we do not only have two entries for ID 1 but now also for ID 2! This means that in data2, we have 2 entries with ID = 2 which are joined to one entry of ID = 2 in data1 consequently leading to 2 entries. Let's control this on data2:
```r
> data2
  ID GroupY  VarY
1  1      A     2
2  2      B    20
3  2      B   200
4  3      C  2000
5  5      D 20000
```
The assumption was correct since we see a double entrie of ID = 2 but with different variables in the other columns.

## Acknowledgements
A big thank you to Joshua de la Bruere (Twitter: @delaBJL) for the advice on how to write pipeable functions and help de-bugging the package!

Commit message:

added blog post link to thomas neitmanns explanation on joins

README.md, after:

 <!-- badges: start -->
  [![R-CMD-check](https://github.com/toebR/joincheckr/workflows/R-CMD-check/badge.svg)](https://github.com/toebR/joincheckr/actions)
  <!-- badges: end -->

# joincheckr
An R package with functions to get information on a left join between 2 data frames.
Feel free to create pull requests, open issues etc. Contributions are very welcome.
If you are unfamiliar with merging/joining datasets, please visit [this blog](https://thomasadventure.blog/posts/r-merging-datasets/) by thomas neitmann on this topic:




<img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/65813696/105766734-63bda380-5f5a-11eb-94bb-6f78f021e805.png" width="400" height="461" align = "right" />

## Introduction
I often find myself in the situation where I need to join (well, left-join) two data sets which are messy and/or too large for any visual control.
Some months ago, I started to write small (and honestly, very simple) helper functions to get information on a possible join before I actually join the data.
In this package, I share some of them which might prove useful to others. This is most of all a learning project for writting transferable functions and wrapping them in a documented package, so don't expect too much.

## Installation
The package is not yet on CRAN so you can install it from github and load it into your session by running the following line:

```r
remotes::install_github("toebR/joincheckr")
library(joincheckr)
```

## Functions
Regarding nomenclature, the functions arguments are distinguished between "data" and "ID". A request for "data_x" is a request for your first data frame i.e. the data frame the join will be based on. "data_y" is subsequently the other. Same principle goes for the "ID" where we enter the common join ID of df x or y. **All functions should be fully pipeable with tidyverse functions**.

Before we get to the functions, lets prepare 2 example datasets: data1 and data2.

```r
datagen <- function(){
  data1 <<- data.frame(ID = c(1,1, 2, 3, 4),
                       GroupX = c("A", "A", "A", "B", "C"),
                       VarX = c(1, 10,100, 1000, 10000))
  
  data2 <<- data.frame(ID = c(1, 2, 2, 3, 5),
                       GroupY = c("A", "B", "B", "C", "D"),
                       VarY = c(2, 20,200, 2000, 20000))
  
  
}
datagen()
```
Which assigns data1 and data2 to the global environment.
data1:
```r
> data1
  ID GroupX  VarX
1  1      A     1
2  1      A    10
3  2      A   100
4  3      B  1000
5  4      C 10000
```
data2:
```r
> data2
  ID GroupY  VarY
1  1      A     2
2  2      B    20
3  2      B   200
4  3      C  2000
5  5      D 20000
```

### get_join_cols()
This function returns a dataframe where columns of two entered dataframes are listed which would be subject to a join.

```r
get_join_cols(data_x = data1, data_y = data2)
```
```r
    cols origin
1     ID data_x
2 GroupX data_x
3   VarX data_x
4     ID data_y
5 GroupY data_y
6   VarY data_y
```
### get_join_count()
This function counts how many times an ID is present in a data frame and returns a tibble.
**Note: When passing a column as ID_x, make sure to use the $ operator**

```r
> get_join_count(data_x = data1, ID_x = data1$ID)
```
```r
  `data1$ID` join_count
       <dbl>      <int>
1          1          2
2          2          1
3          3          1
4          4          1
```

### get_join_rows_n()
This function returns a tibble showing how many rows of df x have at least one join partner in df y by providing the join ID columns of x and y.
0 indicates no join, 1 indicates join.
```r
get_join_rows_n(data_x = data1, ID_x = data1$ID, ID_y = data2$ID)
```
```r
  join_index     n
       <dbl> <int>
1          0     1
2          1     4
```
With our example data, we see that out of five rows in data1, 4 rows have a join partner in data2 based on the column "ID".

## get_join_rowindex()
This function creates a new column in the first df we enter into the function which indicates if the row will receive at least 1 join or not out of df 2. 0 indicates no join, 1 indicates join.
```r
get_join_rowindex(data_x = data1, ID_x = data1$ID, ID_y = data2$ID)
```
```r
  ID GroupX  VarX join_index
1  1      A     1          1
2  1      A    10          1
3  2      A   100          1
4  3      B  1000          1
5  4      C 10000          0
```
## Examples
### 1) Get all rows out of a dataframe which would have a join partner in another
```r
library(dplyr)

get_join_rowindex(data1, data1$ID, data2$ID) %>%
  filter(join_index == 1) #added filter function
```
Result:
```r
  ID GroupX VarX join_index
1  1      A    1          1
2  1      A   10          1
3  2      A  100          1
4  3      B 1000          1
```

### 2) Get nr of ID entries before and after a join
Sometimes, an ID is appearing multiple times in a dataframe. If both dataframes have multiple ID entries, a single ID in df 1 might multiply after the **left** join with df 2 since different rowdata on the same id in df 2 will be joined back to a single entry in df 1. To have a bit of control over this, we can use **get_join_count()** before and after a join to see if the entries multiplied.

First we run the function on our data1:
```r
get_join_count(data_x =  data1, ID_x = data1$ID)
```
```r
  `data1$ID` join_count
       <dbl>      <int>
1          1          2
2          2          1
3          3          1
4          4          1
```
This result shows us, that we have 2 entries for ID 1 in our data1.

Now we perform a dplyr::left_join() between data1 and data2 and then run the function again on the result
```r
left_join(data1, data2, by = "ID") %>%
  get_join_count(ID_x = ID)
```
Which yields the following result.
```r
     ID join_count
  <dbl>      <int>
1     1          2
2     2          2
3     3          1
4     4          1
```
As we see, we do not only have two entries for ID 1 but now also for ID 2! This means that in data2, we have 2 entries with ID = 2 which are joined to one entry of ID = 2 in data1 consequently leading to 2 entries. Let's control this on data2:
```r
> data2
  ID GroupY  VarY
1  1      A     2
2  2      B    20
3  2      B   200
4  3      C  2000
5  5      D 20000
```
The assumption was correct since we see a double entrie of ID = 2 but with different variables in the other columns.

## Acknowledgements
A big thank you to Joshua de la Bruere (Twitter: @delaBJL) for the advice on how to write pipeable functions and help de-bugging the package!
